> The war had begun two and a half years earlier, during an outbreak of cholera in the countryside outside Guatemala City. The state government, then firmly under the control of the progressive Liberal party, ordered quarantines of the infected areas and sent doctors to treat the stricken. At the time, unfortunately, treatments were misguided and as ill-understood as the mysterious source of cholera itself. The remedies included bloodletting and water restriction (cholera victims die in the throes of extreme dehydration), the administration of brandy and the opiate laudanum. Many of the cholera victims, therefore, continued to die, sometimes at an even greater rate at the hands of the well-meaning doctors.
>
> Finally, on May 6, 1837, Rafael Carrera led an enraged mob of nearly two thousand people to confront the health officials in Mataquescuintla, a town in the mountains forty miles east of the capital. **Many in the crowd believed that cholera was poison put in their wells and streams by the Guatemalan ruling class in order to exterminate them so foreign companies could be brought in to develop their land. The medical officials, they claimed, were then sent to finish them off by dispensing poisonous medicines.** By the end of the day the mob forced one or two doctors - the record is not clear - to consume all of the medicines they were dispensing. Laudanum taken in that quantity is fatal and the doctors' deaths left little doubt in the people's mind that the medicine was, in fact, poison. Armed revolts followed throughout the countryside, culminating in a list of grievances against the government. - [Jungle of Stone](https://www.bookpeople.com/book/9780062407405), 148

First reading this in 2019, I wasn't yet privy to the obvious parallels that come to mind today between Rafael Carrera's world and our own. No covid, or anti-vax buzz. No government programs pushing drugs. But even pre-covid, this passage hit me like a ton of bricks. I was shook by how plainly stated this far-fetched belief of the Guatemalan masses was. And under further thought, actually reasonable. Why had I cringed so hard when reading those lines? Like an abused animal, I had shuttered under the weight of a simple notion. The raising of a hand. The honest suspicion of a disenfranchised population.

Sure, the crowd was wrong. The government wasn't spiking their water supply or sending doctors around to poison them. But in a more fundamental sense, weren't they right to distrust? The history of the Americas is littered with cases of wanton abuse of its natives. How many reservations in the US alone were scrapped as soon as Gold or Oil was found? How many deals reneged? Even racial sentiments aside, the powerless are almost always manipulated and tossed about to suit the interests of the powerful.

The revolution which followed this incident upended an urban, secular beaurocracy and replaced it with a regime led by Carrera, an ex-pig herder who had much more in common with the rural, religious population. Assuming they fared better under his direction, wasn't the revolt and it's preceding conspiracy theory justified? And, if we wanted to be even more precise in our assessment, shouldn't we consider the [EV](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/expected-value.asp) of the revolt instead of it's exact consequences? Out of 100 revolts, how many would have resulted in a government which treated the locals better than the existing elite? The (expected) ends justify the means.

In a sea of big fish, shouldn't the minnows be on edge? For the Guatemalans living in a transitioning world of big industry and globalization, why would they blindly trust mechanisms they did not understand? Blind trust leads to death. Cattle to the slaughter house. I think we ought to consider conspiracy theories as a form of democratically-induced entropy, an early signal of the uninformed bashing against the walls of their societal universe. If you suspect you're in a cage, you should probably break it.

I wonder what sorts of evolutionary origins rumor, suspicion, and conspiracy theory may have. Before the enlightenment or scientific revolution, many beliefs must've been driven by "gut" feelings, rather than the cold calculations we associate with today. The fuzzy, non-descript homo sapien subconscious must've been honed over countless split-second decisions and emotion-laden deliberations. How often is this heuristic of ours correct? How many trusting tribes were tricked and conquered by conniving neighbors? When conquered, men are killed and women raped. The male genome has been more severly punished for incorrectly trusting adversaries. Which sex is more trusting (of power) and agreeable today? (curious to hear those who disagree)

[Against the Grain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Against_the_Grain:_A_Deep_History_of_the_Earliest_States) points to tons of studies comparing domesticated animals with their wild counterparts. Generally, the domesticated variants are much less skittish and aggressive, with significant divergence appearing in as little as seven generations. If someone was to do an analysis of this conspiracy phenomena in the animal kingdom though, I'd look to stampedes. They seem to be a prime example of democratically-induced entropy exerted as a defense mechanism. I wonder, how accurate of a signal is the emergent unrest of a stampede? FP/FN rate? Cost (energy, accidental death, etc)? Value to the herd? 

In our human world, rumor, suspicion and conspiracy theory act as rust in the cogs of coordination. All relationships are built on trust, but the economy and social functioning of the state are maybe the most mechanistic dependents of trust. Rioters raid the Capitol and the USD falls globally. Banks give loans with interest rates calculated meticulously by the likelihood you'll pay it back. Regressions in trust have direct consequences, since a population's coordination capacity determines the upper limit of institutional scale and prevalance. In other words, societies with little trust struggle to form large companies and governments, and lose out on the benefits (and costs) of both. I came across a fascinating example of this recently in the documentary [Black Harvest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Harvest_(1992_film)) (can't recommend the trilogy enough). An entire tribe loses out on the fruits of a coffee plantation because they want immediate, equitable returns.

The value of conspiracy theory largely comes down to one's personal ideology today. Do you think our institutions should be larger or smaller? Should we trust, or resist, that which we do not understand? I encourage everyone to lean a little more toward the pro-conspiracy-theory side of things for two main reasons. All conspiracies have motives and methods of execution, and your intuition (or "BS test") for both is probably way off. 

Regarding motive, we live in the most peaceful time to ever exist. Those in the US, experiencing "Pax Americana", have rarely had brushes with the nasty side of big power. We've been lucky enough to experience a period of time where optimal GDP and geo-polical growth comes from a safe, happy, and relatively free population. That isn't always the case. Basic agrarian societies, for one, usually aren't as fortunate. I fear that we're falsely attributing good ethics to our rulers who are behaving optimally, by being good to us. What happens when the optimal changes? If we mis-characterize the powers around us, we'll fail to detect reasonable motives. 

Secondly, a plan's method of action is often contingent on the technology of the day - something we're increasingly ignorant of. If you told someone back in the late 2000s that the US government was tracking the phone calls, texts, and internet browsing records of millions of Americans, you may have been laughed out of the room. How expensive and complex (not to mention [illegal](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-nsa-spying/u-s-court-mass-surveillance-program-exposed-by-snowden-was-illegal-idUSKBN25T3CK)) an operation that must be! And yet, a decade later we learned it to be fact (thanks Snowden). In [The Singularity is Near](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Singularity_Is_Near), Kurzweil claims that our rate of innovation is doubling roughly every ten years. We may consider the past couple decades, Moore's Law and Huang's Law, and nod along to this, but it's implications are truly insane. Extrapolating (in 2001), he explains that "We won’t experience 100 years of progress in the 21st century—it will be more like 20,000 years of progress (at today’s rate)."  How can anyone truly internalize this trend? Even experts, as he points out, consistently underestimate the exponential growth in their field. Today, we've taught a monkey how to play pong with it's [mind](https://youtu.be/2rXrGH52aoM), [insect-sized drones](https://youtu.be/50_kK9phHy8) are being developed, and a [hypersonic weapon](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-22/china-launched-missile-from-hypersonic-weapon-in-july-ft-says) out of China is redefining global military strategy. If you ever want a good shock to your system, go and look at the grants [DARPA](https://www.darpa.mil/work-with-us/opportunities) is offering up. Our sense of "possible" needs to be dramatically loosened as timelines of innovation shrink.

All that being said, I think there's a possibility that we'll need even greater coordination to get off this planet and spread out amongst the stars.
